**144_MV_JoinAP**


The Joint Activity Pattern The joint activity pattern in Service Event
visual Event handlers combines events from different streams based on a
commonality between them.


Take a look at the event schema here.


First has a string message and second has an integer, but they both have
a property called common constraint.


If we joined events from streams each based on one of these types, we'd
get events that showed both a message and a digit where their common
constraints matched.


But events don't come into the system at exactly the same rate or
quantity, so let's see how the join task behaves.


Here's a visual event handler with two different event streams that
will be joined based on their common constraint.


Let's first configure the join activity pattern with what the 2 events
have in common, which is first in dot common constraint set equal to 2nd
in dot Common constraint within duration tells the system exactly how
long to wait for matching events from all participating streams.


Join order is very important.


By default, the join goes from left to right with the left most side as
the gating factor for whether or not you're going to see an event.


Let's start by triggering event in the first in event stream with the
common constraint of loop.


The join stream will now wait 30 seconds to see if an event with the
same common constraint comes through the 2nd stream and when it does, we
now have a single event from both streams with the information from both
events.


What happens when event comes through the 2nd stream but no matching
event comes from the first within that 32nd window?


The answer is absolutely nothing.


No event will occur and no timeout will ever occur because the join
order starts from first in and it is the gating stream.


If we send an event through the gating stream and no matching event
arrives from the subordinate stream, a timeout event will occur.


Finally, if a subordinate stream receives an event 1st and the gating
stream receives the corresponding event that matches within the time
frame, we will see an event.
